---
layout: post
title: My First flask app.
permalink: /web/flask/day-one
---

[Previous](./day-zero)

## Day - 1: My first flask app
Ensure that you have the development space setup ready. Refer page [Setting up of development environment](./day-zero). 

Open the command prompt or terminal. Activated the virtual environment. To do so use activate command inside ".virtual_env/bin" . Windows users should use activate.bat.

##### Install Flask
```bash
ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$ source ./.virtual_env/bin/activate
(.virtual_env) ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$ pip install flask
```

The installation take a few minutes. The installation process takes care of installing the peer dependencies for flask package. Once the installation is complete verify the installation.

```bash
(.virtual_env) ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$ flask --version
Python 3.8.5
Flask 2.0.1
Werkzeug 2.0.1
(.virtual_env) ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$
```

##### Our first flask Api
Create a directory **app**, and within the directory let us add **app.py**.
```bash
(.virtual_env) ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$ tree Learning_Flask/
Learning_Flask/
└── app
    └── app.py

1 directory, 1 file
(.virtual_env) ubuntu@ubuntu:~/Programming$ 
```

Let us add the below code within **app.py**
```python
# Import flask
from flask import Flask

# Create a flask instance
app = Flask(__name__)

# Create a base route
@app.route('/')
def welcome():
    return "Hello, Welcome to flask"

# Start the server
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=5000, debug=True)
```

1. ##### Import flask.
    
    The first step is to import flask `from flask import Flask`. This is the base dependency for our application. The module is available once we have installed the module in our virtual environment. Ensure that you key in **"F"** while you import the module. This is because we are importing **"Flask"** class from the package **"flask"**. 

    - Reference to pep standard coding guideline [Class Names](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#class-names)

1. ##### Create a flask instance.

    Flask instance creation is the next step. To create flask instance we use `Flask(__name__)`. The `__name__` is a builtin variable in python which evaluates to current module/file. Hence `Flask(__name__)`  identifies the current file or path while executing a program. 

    The Flask class uses the value from the __builtin__ to setup the flask instance.

1. ##### Add a base route.

    The next step is a to add a **route** and create a python function which routes the request to provide a response. In this case, we return a string **"Hello, Welcome to flask"** as response. *route* is a decorator extended from the flask instance which manages request routing. Route has an extra parameter **methods** which accepts a list of valid http verbs". The **http verbs** are "GET", "POST", "PUT" and "DELETE".

1. ##### Start the server.

    The final step in the process is to start the server.The app instance of app extends a method **run**. This method allows us to start a development server on designated ipAddress and port. The default ipAddress is localhost and port is 5000.


Please refer github for the [code](https://github.com/pyVarad/flask-blog/tree/main/Day-1) details discussed for the day. 

That's all for today. Happy coding.

[Next: Day - 2](./day-two)